# Computational-Methods-For-Data-Analysis
Five projects demonstrate different exploratory and objective data analysis methods applied to the physical, engineering, and biological sciences.
* [Hunting for a submarine](https://github.com/yuminyin/Computational-Methods-For-Data-Analysis/tree/main/Hunting%20for%20a%20submarine "Hunting for a submarine") illustrates the MATLAB implementation of a fast Fourier transform and Gaussian-based spectraul filtering applied to a real-world scenario. To begin, we first uses the fast Fourier transform to convert the data into the frequency domain. After that, to take the advantage of the key that the noise is white, i.e., it has zero mean, we average over realizations to cancel out the noise in order to figure out the center frequency. Lastly, we define our filter as the Gaussian function and determine the trajectory of the submarine by filtering the data around the center frequency. 
* [Rock & Roll and the Gabor transform](https://github.com/yuminyin/Computational-Methods-For-Data-Analysis/tree/main/Rock%20%26%20Roll%20and%20the%20Gabor%20transform "Rock & Roll and the Gabor transform") battles against the Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle. The drawback of applying the Fourier transform to a signal is that we cannot have all the information about both time and frequency, which are both essential if we want to reproduce the music score for a song. The Gabor transform is our tool used to filter signals so that we can have some information about time and some information about frequency of each music score being played in each song. 
* [Principal Component Analysis and a Spring Mass system](https://github.com/yuminyin/Computational-Methods-For-Data-Analysis/tree/main/Principal%20Component%20Analysis%20and%20a%20Spring%20Mass%20system "Principal Component Analysis and a Spring Mass system") helps us understand the motion of the mass-spring system experimentally, supposing we do not have much physics training. We performs the Principal Component Analysis (PCA) on the videos about mass-spring systems and projects different motions of the mass onto principal component(s), which should be a dimensionality reduction. This project illustrates various aspects of the PCA, its practical usefulness, and the effects of noise on the PCA algorithms
* [Classifying Digits](https://github.com/yuminyin/Computational-Methods-For-Data-Analysis/tree/main/Classifying%20Digits "Classifying Digits") teaches MATLAB to recognize digits. We obtain thousands of images of hand-written digits from MNIST dataset. We deamn and then perform Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) analysis of both training and test data sets. After we have our data sets projected on PCA space, we are able to build our hand-made classifer using Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA). Lastly, we want to quantify its accuracy on the test data and compare its performance between suppor vector machines (SVM) and decision tree classifiers on both the training and test sets.
* [Background Subtraction in Video Streams](https://github.com/yuminyin/Computational-Methods-For-Data-Analysis/tree/main/Background%20Subtraction%20in%20Video%20Streams "Background Subtraction in Video Streams") applies the Dynamic Mode Decomposition (DMD) method on two video streams and separate them to both foreground and background videos. In a video with a static background, DMD method allows us to pick up mode(s) that hardly changes at all, which constitutes the low-rank background. 
